it's been in a state of near Perpetual
War for decades it receives billions of
dollars a year in Aid and weapons and it
has consistently broken international
law by expanding its occupation and
settlements is Israel a normal State how
does it compare to failed States this is
Inside
Story
[Music]
hello and welcome to the program I'm SEL
vaner Israel is a relatively young State
and one of the most troubled fighting
several Wars with neighboring states
since its Creation in 1948 it has one of
the world's best equipped armies thanks
to billions of dollars in US military
and financial aid each year the current
coalition government is the most
right-wing in Israel's history and
before this Gaza War Mass protests were
taking place for months against the
government's efforts to weaken the
Supreme Court's Powers Israel has
ignored international law and United
Nations resolutions on the treatment of
Palestinians and the occupation of
Palestinian land governments and
international rights organizations
accuse its military of war crimes in the
brutal offensive that we're seeing in
Gaza for its leader prime minister
Benjamin Netanyahu Israel is the only
democracy in the Middle East a view
often repeated by supporters but for
critics Israel is a political entity
that can only survive with repression
the denial of rights and violence so is
Israel a normal State could it be
defined as a fragile state or does it
have characteristics of a failed State
we'll be putting those questions in more
to our guests in a few moments first
though this report from K Lopez
huran Israel is under pressure with
protesters demanding prime minister
Benjamin Netanyahu bring home the
captives Hamas is still holding in
Gaza Netanyahu is often referred to as
Mr security but critics including former
Military Officers say he and his
right-wing Coalition have failed the
country too many social and political
fragilities they say have been exposed
and the war could magnify them it's
derailing out of control as it continues
to snowball and more and more death
amasses and the cycle of death continues
uh I don't think it's bringing security
Now and I don't think it's it will bring
security for the future I think it'll do
the the contrary it'll be the
opposite Relentless attacks on Gaza and
the growing toll of Palestinian
casualties have led to other concerns
from the judicial system where
Palestinians can be imprisoned
indefinitely without charge to the
inequality faced by Israel's minority
groups other issues such as the
expansion of Israeli settlements illegal
under international law and the
distribution of assault rifles to
Israeli civilians I in the occupied West
Bank have also raised alarm the Prime
Minister says political Rivals are using
the war to fuel baseless
criticism we have a desire to avoid
harming the population we have a very
strong desire to hurt
Hamas but long before October the 7th
tensions were already brewing with some
of the largest demonstrations in
Israel's history netanyahu's push to
curve the powers of the Supreme Court
led to widespread spr condemnation at
home and
abroad critics accuse the Whitewing
government of false advertising by
presenting Israel as the only democracy
in the Middle
East now its war on Gaza has opened up
another front there is a sense the
country is in a Perpetual state of War
Israel is trying to keep its allies
close but as the horrors of Gaza unfold
daily more around the world will be
asking if Israel can function without
being at War
kaan for insight
story let's bring in our guests in
Chicago we are joined by Ali abuna the
co-founder of the electronic inata an
independent online news publication
focusing on Palestine in Washington DC
is Paul Turner the president and
executive director of the fund for peace
that's a nonprofit research organization
that produces the annual fragile States
index or FSI we'll be talking about that
in a moment and in hia is Ilan Pape
Israeli historian author of the idea of
Israel a history of power and knowledge
a warm welcome to you all Ali let's go
to you first one year after operation
castled that was the 2008 uh war in Gaza
you wrote an article entitled Israel
resembles a failed State and that
assessment was based partly on the
destruction that you saw in Gaza on
Israel's standing in the inter
International Community as well as other
factors if you had to complete or
rewrite that article today 14 years on
what would be your
assessment sadly it would be the same uh
what I wrote in 2008 or 2009 and again
in 2014 is Israel is a so-called state
that was founded on expulsion ethnic
cleansing and what uh historian Elan
Pape is called incremental genocide and
what we predicted over the years that is
that this incremental genocide could
become a very rapid genocide and that's
what we have seen since October 7th a
genocide that is being fueled by Lies by
demonization of the Palestinian people
by
dehumanization and uh I think that a
state that can only exist by oppress ing
uh expelling dispossessing and
ultimately Exterminating the indigenous
people of the territory exists on Paul
Turner uh president and executive
director of the fund for peace a
nonprofit research organization that
produces the annual fragile States index
as I said in the in the opener I want to
talk about that index because you rate
Israel and you rate separately Palestine
on this
fragility um gradient um explain to us
how it works I mean the the briefly your
methodology is that you look at a number
of quantitative qualitative factors uh
the politics of a country the economics
of a country the Society of a country so
we can put that up on screen because you
you do share that with people who go on
your website and then you give all these
countries a grade and you put them in
buckets from sustainable to at the at
the low end of the scale um failed State
essentially where does Israel
stand I I think Israel is facing a
really challenging situation and that it
has both external and and internal
pressures a lot of countries um that are
out there obviously uh will will
experience one or the other um those
internal pressures have been escalating
recently um for for reasons that you've
already shared in in the broadcast um
however I think it it currently is is
far from a failed State um when when we
think about failed States a lot of times
those for example in the security sector
uh they they talk about how they no
longer how they have a monopoly on the
use of force um within their borders at
the fund for peace is as you referen we
tend to believe it's it's more
meaningful to talk about uh terms of
State fragility than than State failure
necessarily because every country in the
world has pockets of fragility uh and
that fragility exists on a spectrum or a
Continuum where countries have very high
social economic political and security
stresses and some have less um and is
Israel is is experiencing a combination
um countries at the top of our fragile
States index for example like Somalia
and Afghanistan have difficulty
governing across their territory uh they
typically have Forest borders often
armed groups operating within their
borders and experience major societal
divisions uh fragile States typically
experience protracted recurrent
humanitarian crisis uh with with high
levels of sustained human suffering so
as you hear some of those descript is of
of a a failed State you can tell that
Israel really has has quite a ways to go
before it gets there which is a good
thing but it's also experiencing those
incredible stressors and it needs to be
proactive in dealing with those in
instead of let letting them fester and
and exacerbate so I noticed actually
looking at your index so to be clear
index um Israel rates pretty highly uh
it rates pretty well in in that index
it's near uh where the United United
States is it's in the 140 range and you
measure about 179 countries if I'm not
mistaken but uh a while ago a while back
you used to measure Israel and the
occupied West Bank and you would get to
a very different grade overall grade
whereas I've noticed now over the last I
think it's three years you measure
Israel and Palestine very uh you measure
them separately and such that Israel
gets a essentially a good grade it's you
assess it to be a stable country and
Palestine a low grade on fragility index
why did you disassociate the two bearing
in mind that Palestine is uh the
Palestinian territories the occupied
West Bank is well occupied by
Israel uh great question so with with
all things we do our best to let Data
Drive us we we um uh strive to be the
nonpartisan and and uh not not show
favoritism and let the information lead
where it may um so as a lot of different
um data sets begin to uh to provide
information both on Israel and on
Palestine we followed suit um we work by
pulling in thousands of different data
points both from existing indices as
well as from um kind of tools that are
are designed to to go out and look at
what's on the internet and bring that
forward and then work with experts to
qualitatively assess that so uh as new
became available that allowed us to
separate the two uh that's why that
happened there wasn't anything else
behind it other than that sure but it it
does present a very different picture
when you look at them together and they
are inext inextricably
linked certainly and and I think um it
it might be a little bit naive um given
the uh interdependence within the region
to to only look at those two uh because
I think that you'll see um the
activities taking place today in Israel
and Palestine are having a huge impact
across the region and so to to be able
to um to justifiably separate you know
any attempts to understand what's going
on by only looking at one place or
another I think does it does it a real
disservice Ali I see you frowning uh
I'll give you a chance to address that
in a moment but I I want to turn to Elan
um Elan you know when I look at the FSI
the fragility
uh index it it goes from essentially
failed to
sustainable now correct me if I'm wrong
but looking at the long Arc of your work
um I think it's fair to say you argue
pretty powerfully that Israel in its
current construct with its current
policies within its current borders um
and with its current Administration not
just of of Israel but the occupation of
Palestinian territories that
trajectory is not sustainable is that
fair I think it's a fair assessment
because I think Israel is not just a
state Israel is a project it's a settler
Colonial project and I do think that we
are witnessing the beginning of the end
of this uh project because it rests on
three pillars one is material of course
and and there I agree I mean when you
use an index that looks at
sustainability of State according to
their material capability Israel is
doing well and as you mentioned in your
introductory remarks he does well
because of the mainly because of the
United States so this is a condition
that can change the second pillar is the
social coherence of the settler society
and we know that this coherence is
non-existent anymore uh there is a bit
of an optic illusion because of the
Hamas operation on the 7th of October
that created a sense of unity but it's
not going to cover up for the uh frag
mation of the society that we have seen
until the 7th of October it seems that
coherence that is based on social
coherence that is based on hatred of of
the Arabs or the
Palestinians and doesn't have very much
anything else in common is not very
sustainable and more importantly than
anything else of course there is the
legitimacy pillar and of Israel enjoys
the legitimacy of Western governments or
uh governments in the global North and
therefore there is a sense that it can
still be sustainable because of that
support of the elites but it has lost
the support of the Civil societies and
this is why probably it's the only state
in the world that lobbies for its
existence not for its policies not for
its better economic uh performance but
but but for its very uh moral
justification and it's Los
that battle uh just a caveat uh uh as an
historian I can tell you that when
projects like settler
colonialism are reaching their last
phase unfortunately this can be quite a
long period it doesn't happen in one day
or two days and the problem is of course
that they become more brutal and
ruthless in that last phase which is on
the one hand very bad news for for those
who are the victims of this state or
been always the victims of this state
which are the Palestinians but it also
means that the Palestinians can and have
to get their act together because I do
think there will be a vacuum once this
uh colon settler Colonial project
disintegrates and there will be
something else coming instead of it
which of course uh we all hope at least
I hope that the Palestinian Liberation
movement would lead us uh into a better
future when this will
happen Ali what did you want to say
earlier yeah I I just I mean you saw me
making a face it's because I find this
kind of very dry very technical uh
pseudo uh academic discourse of these
indexes as if you can measure these
things with numbers and it all looks
very objective I just find it very
unconvincing and I find it unconvincing
and this is not anything personal about
your other gu guest it's a comment on
the structure of how these indexes are
produced but when I look at the website
of the fund for peace this
organization it's funded by the British
government the Australian government the
Dutch government by NATO by Chevon by a
major oil company among others and so
these are not um parties that are going
to produce research that uh casts Israel
in a True Light to talk about Israel as
a stable country when it has murdered
more than 7,000 children in the past 60
days to talk about Israel as a stable
country when it is has attacked and
destroyed hospitals when it destroyed uh
in the last few days the Palace of
Justice in Gaza destroying the court
records and the legal records for
hundreds of thousands of people this is
not a a country or a state by any normal
definition and to talk about it in that
way is utterly obscene and shows a
complete disconnection from reality uh
look at the pictures on the screen now
this is not what normal countries do and
uh to to separate the West Bank and Gaza
from Israel is another fiction to
pretend you can carve off Israel as some
kind of normal stable country and the
West Bank in Gaza to even there's no
Palestinian state to call Palestine EST
state is false it's like calling the
wars or ghetto EST State uh this is a
killing field and it's utterly obscene
to uh to to to uh distract attention
away from that Elan is correct this is a
settler Colonial project and it's one
that has only ever been able to exist
through massacring Palestinians uh
starting from the 1930s with the Bings
that the zionists carried out in Market
places in Palestine to the massacres of
derin and Andia and Sabra and chatila to
today normal countries don't exist on
the basis that Israel exists of Massacre
after Massacre after Massacre Israel is
not a state it is a criminal
Enterprise Paul I assume you probably
want to write a response to some of what
Ali was saying about the FSI this the
your the fragility index that you put
together um sure I I can just share
briefly that uh we actually haven't had
any funding in the development of the
fragile States index for many years uh
so that that's all done inhouse um and
we haven't ever had a donor come in and
and tell us um how we are to use or to
manipulate data uh that that's not
something that we would stand for and
goes against our operating principles um
I think that there's a little bit of of
internal dissonance or or friction in
terms of our our
conversation um there are a number of
countries including my own um that are
are fairly stable uh but are also
involved in in Acts that go against some
of the the international norms and and
and even arguably the rule of law uh we
were involved in two conflicts for
almost 20 years um and and have uh
active operations taking place around
the world um that um that didn't
necessarily destabilize us as a country
other than having some economic impacts
uh so I I think that that that may be
something that uh is worth really trying
to parse out uh issues of stability
versus whether or not we see um approval
in the way that a country conducts its
business um and whether there is human
suffering that's taking place that's a
question I was actually wanted to ask
you is about this sustainability since
since you measure country R the FSI
measures countries right from from being
a quasi failed state to being
sustainable um and I would point out
that your report was put together I I
believe before the Gaza War it may look
a little different now I don't know how
you would update it um in fact that's
the heart of my question is this what
we're seeing um sustainable if you
factor in what's happened in the last
two
months that's a a great question um I I
think that when you look at Israel and
and and what is causing some of the
issues of its fragility we see uh
concerns in two different places one is
in the area of group grievance kind of
the internal divisions that are taking
place and the other is around the
factionalization of the elites um
whether or not the what's taking place
the last two months is sustainable um
you know we don't have a crystal ball
nor does anyone else um I I think uh as
we look out to the future we could
anticipate fairly significant drops in
in uh fragility in other words it's
becoming increasingly fragile um and I
think that the data will certainly
reinforce that um we also have a tool
called a crisis sensitivity simulator
where you're able to take the historical
data and introduce low medium or high
Lev shocks to a country and see what
happens and then when we do this with
Israel uh we see that that it does have
uh a protracted effect over time and I
think we could anticipate a multi-year
effort to recover from from the shocks
that this is creating both internal and
externally okay let let me take that to
to Elon um so Paul was talking about
Israel would be will be increasingly
fragile as a result of of this conflict
what we've seen over the last two months
uh it's possible that future reports
will reflect this you told us a few
minutes ago that you think this is the
beginning this marks the beginning of
the end of Israel's settler project I
was wondering what makes you believe
that do you see concrete signs of that
or is that uh is that more of a general
perception no no it's not a general
perception I can see very concrete
evidence for this uh the um debate that
was was was more than a debate it was
almost like a called Civil War that did
not at all concern the Palestinian it
was an internal Jewish debate between uh
you can call it the secular state of
Israel and the theocrat itic
fundamentalist state of Judea namely the
state that grew in the occupied
territories in in the settlements you
could obvious you could clearly see that
the idea of a Jewish State translated
into a an ethnic racist uh theocracy is
winning over the idea which would anyway
to my mind was never going to be uh
realistic of having the same occupation
and colonization alongside a pluralist
liberal uh Society so between these two
options the options of a fundamentalist
non-democratic some would say even
fascist uh Jewish State and I'm I'm not
yet talking even about the Palestinians
uh is winning support among a large
sections of the Israeli Jewish society
and that means that internally there is
hardly any cohesion to keep the society
uh together and economically the people
are holding Israel together from an
economic uh perspective namely the
economic Elite of Israel belongs to the
secular so-called liberal Israelis and
they were about to take out their money
out of Israel before the 7th of October
many of them talk about talked about
relocation or IM immigration uh the uh
events in the last two months gives the
impression as if this is all behind us
but it's not this will return and of
course I I I would join Ali in in in
saying that apart from all of this the
colonization and occupation of millions
of Palestinian through State apparatus
that involved hundreds of thousands of
people to maintain it is not as an
historian I I'm I'm sure this cannot be
upheld forever and uh this is not just
because of the the Palestinian
resistance but it's also because of uh
uh processes that we see taking place in
the neighboring Arab states in the
Muslim world in the global South and in
the large section of the Civil Society
in the global North all of it doesn't
evot well for the for the Zionist
project because it seems to be going
against history if you think about it
history is now moving towards
decolonization to the end of colonial
projects the end of settle Colonial
project and Israel is moving into
enhancing the settler Colonial project
there's so many groups in the world that
see that their own struggle for justice
is the is combined with the struggle of
Palestine for justice yes it has not yet
influence the governments but it has the
potential to do this you know you can
look at it differently there is a huge
movement of solidarity with the
Palestinian called the BDS the boycott
divestment and sanctions the Bood and
divestment is working the sanction has
not happened yet but you can see the
movement the potential movement from the
B and D if you want the boycot and
divestment into the suction exactly as
happened in the case of a part South
Africa that's why I'm saying in this
story we see all these indication that
this is about to change unfortunately as
happened in aart that South Africa this
is a moment a very dangerous moment also
for the Palestinian people because these
regimes always fight uh for their life
with the most ruthless and most powerful
lethal weapons as we can see unfolding
in front of our eyes in the Gaza Strip
today just briefly uh Ali I'd like to
bring you back in and this is probably
going to be the last answer as somebody
who's uh advocated for um one B bational
states with equal rights for all um do
you agree with that assessment that we
might be right now witnessing the end
the beginning of the end of Israel's
current political
project yeah I just I just want to be
clear I I didn't mean to suggest uh
regarding the fund for peace that uh any
of these funders were coming in and
directly manipulating the data of course
not I just meant to say that an
organization like that knows that if
they're producing information truthful
and critical about Israel the funding
from the Pentagon the state department
and the defense intelligence agency
which the fund for peace also receives
according to its website would pretty
quickly stop but yes we are seeing the
end of this colonial project um it's a
bloody end uh it's much bloodier than
South Africa because at the end of the
day the South Africans said we don't we
we can't sustain the level of violence
it will C it will take to keep our white
supremacist settler colony alive and
they went into negotiations to
peacefully end apartheid Israel needs to
be brought to that point through maximum
International pressure and the state
that commits genocide as Israel is doing
right now as we speak has to be brought
to a peaceful conclusion and replaced
with true democracy equality restitution
and decolonization there is no future
for this genocidal entity in Palestine
or the region and it has to be brought
to a peaceful end Ali abuna Paul Turner
Ilan Pape thank you very much to all of
you for joining us and thank you too for
watching you can see the program again
anytime by visiting our website al.com
and for further discussion go to our
Facebook page that is
facebook.com AJ insidestory you can also
join the conversation on X our handle is
AJ inside story from me S vaner and the
whole team here in OHA bye for
[Music]
now